Add airgapped scs blogpost (#555)
SovereignCloudStack/website: _i18n/en/_posts/blog/2023-02-24-airgapped-scs.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Air gapped installation"
category: tech
author:
  - "Tim Beermann"
avatar:
  - "tbeermann.jpeg"

> image: "default-card.jpg"

Reviewer: In my personal opinion, the blog post will stand out more by using an individual share pic. What do you think about using something like: https://www.pexels.com/photo/antelope-canyon-in-arizona-2984868/?

Author: Done.

3. __registry__ for _container_ images

    As this is the official implementation provided from docker, we'll just use this for container mirroring.

4. __bandersnatch__ for _pypi_ packages

    Bandersnatch itself is "just" a client, but an official one. Sadly, it uses a config file which needs to contain the packages that are about to be mirrored. So no API. Therefore [_banderctl_](github.com/osism/python-banderctl) was developed. It mounts the config file and puts an API in front of it. The client itself is executed periodically to perform mirroring. Pretty neat!

There is still one big problem: They all require an internet connection. But it's only these services, that require them. And the datastores of them can be prefilled and be "manuall migrated" to the air gapped installation. But this is still something you need to do on your own. We aim to prepare more information on this in the next featureset for air gapped installations.

## Architecture

As you might have noticed, this is quite some stuff to do, so let's put it into one big image:

> ![architecture](/assets/images/blog/airgap-architecture.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% asset '/assets/images/blog/airgap-architecture.png' class="figure-img w-100" %}
```

We're using an asset pipeline to optimize rich media within our website. Thus the usual Markdown image tag won't work here. Feel free to accept my suggestion.

---
layout: post
title:  "Air gapped installation"
category: tech
author:
  - "Tim Beermann"
avatar:
  - "tbeermann.jpeg"
image: "blog/airgap-takeoff.jpg"
about:
  - "tibeer"
---

In this post we will introduce you to our latest feature of SCS: Air-gapped installations.
You will learn why this is benificial for the consumers of SCS but also for the development and testing process in general.

> Table of content:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Table of contents:
```

- [Current situation](#current-situation)
- [Pain points](#pain-points)
- [Requirements for air gaps](#requirements-for-air-gaps)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Spin-off standalone software](#spin-off-standalone-software)
- [Things to come](#things-to-come)

## Current situation

Every installation of SCS requires an internet connection, not only for the workload on SCS, but rather for installation and
updating. If you start from scratch, you need to have access to several repositories and upstream mirrors
(e.g. <https://pypi.org>). Without them, the underlay reference implementation [osism](https://github.com/osism) cannot provision
the hardware machines with the required software components.

## Pain points

> The main reason for having an air gapped is of course based on customer requirements: Allowing industrial partners to host SCS as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main reason for having an air gapped installation method is of course based on customer requirements: Allowing industrial partners to host SCS as
```

5. 🔉 Auditing

    Running so many services and software components leads to the problem, that you loose track which component needs to talk to
    the internet. Of course you can hook up a firewall in between to track and block them, but this is too much effort and
    requires engineering outside of the main product. The benefit in contrast to the work labor needed to keep this working is
    not justifiable.

6. 🔒 Security

    This point is partly also auditing. As there are too many components in the stack, we cannot keep track of the connections
    that are required and (hopefully not) the ones are not required. Meaning that we would not know instantly, if there is some
    malicious activity. We might not even notice it at all; morelikely by accident.

## Requirements for air gaps

For the first iteration of air-gapped installations we set our goal to create mirrors for the following components: _ansible_
collections and roles, _deb_ packages, _container_ images and _pypi_ packages. Depending on the -let's call them- asset to be
mirrored, different software has be improved or even developed from the ground up.

1. __wormhole__ for _ansible_ collections and roles

>     Starting with more or less the most complex component. Wormhole is a completly new software that is able to mirror

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Starting with more or less the most complex component: Wormhole is a completly new software that is able to mirror
```

    collections and roles from the ansible galaxy. Actually, there is other software available which should be able to mirror
    assets from the ansible galaxy: [Pulp](https://pulpproject.org/). Pulp would have been actually really nice, because it can

>     also mirror other stuff like pypi packages, etc. Eventually we decided that pulp will not be the solution for us because: It

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    also mirror other stuff like pypi packages, etc. Eventually we decided that pulp will not be the solution for us because of a variety of reasons: It
```

>     also mirror other stuff like pypi packages, etc. Eventually we decided that pulp will not be the solution for us due of a variety of reasons: It

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    also mirror other stuff like pypi packages, etc. Eventually we decided that pulp will not be the solution for us due to a variety of reasons: It
```

    is still under heavy development; it offers only OpenShift deployments or an all in one container or a bare metal
    installation. They will not provide (even with contribution from our side) helm charts. Additionally, the handling of pulp
    itself is quite aweful in general. KISS is the way we want it! Enter [_wormhole_](github.com/osism/python-ansible-wormhole) -

>     the mirror software for the ansible-galaxy. It might not be pretty, but it does the job. However it did required

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    the mirror software for the ansible-galaxy. It might not be pretty, but it does the job. However it did require
```

>     the mirror software for the ansible-galaxy. It might not be pretty, but it does the job. And it required reverse-engineering
>     and even debugging the galaxy api. By the way: this might be the reason, why ansible itself want's to migrate to pulp. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    the mirror software for the ansible-galaxy. It might not be pretty, but it does the job. However it did require reverse-engineering
    and even debugging the galaxy api. By the way: this might be the reason, why ansible itself want's to migrate to pulp. The
```

>     reverse-engineering and even debugging the galaxy api. By the way: this might be the reason, why ansible itself want's to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    reverse-engineering and even debugging the galaxy api. By the way: this might be the reason, why ansible itself wants to
```

    current implementation of the galaxy is scary.

2. ~~__aptly__~~ for _deb_ packages

    [Aptly](https://www.aptly.info/) is a project with a long history and is still being maintained. There are several

>     implementations evailable, all good enough to just use them. It's been battle proven as a reliable deb package mirror

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    implementations available, all good enough to just use them. It's been battle proven as a reliable deb package mirror
```

Reviewer 2: Regarding: "Battle proven" - I'd like to avoid terminology / wording that refers to combat or has a military background.

>     software. Aptly provides some sort of API functionality, but not everything we need. For the moment, twe decided that this is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    software. Aptly provides some sort of API functionality, but not everything we need. For the moment, we decided that this is
```

>     good enough, even if it involves some manual steps. In the current version, aplty is not used in the testbed as this is under

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    good enough, even if it involves some manual steps. In the current version, aptly is not used in the testbed as this is under
```

    active implementation development.

3. __registry__ for _container_ images

    As this is the official implementation provided from docker, we'll just use this for container mirroring.

4. __bandersnatch__ for _pypi_ packages

    [Bandersnatch](https://pypi.org/project/bandersnatch/) itself is "just" a client, but an official one. Sadly, it uses a
    config file which needs to contain the packages that are about to be mirrored. So no API. Therefore
    [_banderctl_](github.com/osism/python-banderctl) was developed. It mounts the config file and puts an API in front of it.
    The client itself is executed periodically to perform mirroring. Pretty neat!
    Bandersnatch and banderctl only act as supporting services outside of a testbed, as there is no need for python package
    installations during a testbed deployment. But for CI-CD activity, this is a big step towards more frequent and faster
    build times.

> There is still one big problem: They all require an internet connection. But it's only these services, that require them. And the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is still one big problem: They all require an internet connection. But it's only these services, that require them. The
```

> There is still one big problem: They all require an internet connection. But it's only these services, that require them. And the
> datastores of them can be prefilled and be "manuall migrated" to the air gapped installation. But this is still something you
> need to do on your own. We aim to prepare more information on this in the next featureset for air gapped installations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is still one big problem: They all require an internet connection, but only these services require the connection. Their
datastores can be prefilled and "manually migrated" to the air gapped installation. This however is something you
still need to do on your own. We aim to prepare more information on this in the next featureset for air gapped installations.
```

## Architecture

As you might have noticed, this is quite some stuff to do, so let's put it into one big image:

<figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:50%">
  <a href="{% asset "blog/airgap-architecture.png" @path %}">
    {% asset 'blog/airgap-architecture.png' class="figure-img w-100" %}
  </a>
</figure>

The graphic is devided into two major parts, let's start with the upper one: This is the mirror infrastructure of OSISM GmbH.
We'll use this for our CI-CD tests and maybe also for public SCS installations in the future. The mirrors itself pull the assets
from the upstream sources. You might have noticed, that there is also a component called "harbor". [Harbor](https://goharbor.io/)

> deals also with container images. We use it for our own build containers, therefore we'll split container images into just "pure"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
deals with container images. We use it for our own build containers, therefore we'll split container images into just "pure"
```

mirrors and the ones we build our own.

The bottom half represents any installation of SCS, may it be a testbed, a
[cloud-in-a-box](https://github.com/osism/cloud-in-a-box) or similar. With a squid proxy in front requests get blocked if they
want to access something else than the mirrors OSISM provides. Additionally, each deployment should also bring their own mirror
stack. This will allow SCS integrators to provide these mirrors to their users resepctively.

In the middle is still something that is not clear yet: Github and SBOM. These two points still need clarification and will be
refined in the future.

## Spin-off standalone software

> [__wormhole__](github.com/osism/python-ansible-wormhole) can be used by you to mirror collections and roles from the official

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[__Wormhole__](github.com/osism/python-ansible-wormhole) can be used by you to mirror collections and roles from the official
```

> ansible galaxy. That beeing said, it fakes some values in the API reposonses (like IDs or timestamps). It would just make no

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ansible galaxy. That beeing said, it fakes some values in the API responses (like IDs or timestamps). It would just make no
```

> ansible galaxy. That beeing said, it fakes some values in the API responses (like IDs or timestamps). It would just make no

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ansible galaxy. That being said, it fakes some values in the API responses (like IDs or timestamps). It would just make no
```

sense to also store this data. Its only purpose is to mirror the assets with the versions in the correct order. Oh, by the way:
There is a nasty bug inside the official galaxy client tool (and probably also the galaxy API). When querying for a latest
version of a collection, the client just scrapes _ALL_ versions and picks the highest one. Even though, the API provides a link to
the latest version. Details can be found [here](https://github.com/ansible/ansible/issues/79467).

> [__banderctl__](github.com/osism/python-banderctl) creates an API endpoint in front of the bandersnatch clients config.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[__Banderctl__](github.com/osism/python-banderctl) creates an API endpoint in front of the bandersnatch clients config.
```

Bandersnatch itself is capable of a lot more things than just mirroring. But as we just require mirroring, this is still fine for
us. What's missing is an API to edit this file and append new packages or even remove packages from it. That's where banderctl
jumps right in. It translates your API request and applies the desired addition or deletion into bandersnatchs config.
Bandersnatch itself runs in parallel and is periodically executed. You do not want to trigger it on every change, as its runtime
takes quite long and would throw errors, if there are parallel executions happening on the index files.

## Things to come

Beside the already mentioned points, we still need to implement signing for deb packages. While doing this, we might also need to
consider, how we abuse the proxy to redirecting official requests (e.g. against the official quay.io from clients) to our
internal mirror. Once this is done, we can continue to create a guide to preload the internal mirrors before cutting the

> installation from the internet. This way, we will have finally a full air gap installation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
installation from the internet. This way, we will have a full air gap installation finally.
```
